# Project Datawarehouse

## Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Project description

In this project, you'll apply concept and tenchnology of data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.

## Project Datasets
You'll be working with two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:

Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data
Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json

### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```
And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like.

Insert image here


## Database schema design


Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and event datasets, a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis is created. This includes the following tables.

#### Staging Tables
- staging_events
- staging_songs

####  Fact Table
- songplays - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong - 
*songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent*

#### Dimension Tables
- users - users in the app - 
*user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level*
- songs - songs in music database - 
*song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration*
- artists - artists in music database - 
*artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude*
- time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units - 
*start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekdays



## Project Template

The project template includes six files:

sql_queries.py: In this python script you will create queries for staging, fact and dimensions tables.
cluster.ipynb: This is a jupyter notebook which creates and deletes a refshift cluster.
create_table.py: This script creates the fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift cluster.
etl.py: This script loads and processes data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift.
requirements.txt: Python dependencies needed to run the project on your local machine.
README.md This is the current file which provides detailed description of the project.

#### Project Steps
Below are steps you can follow to complete each component of this project.

##### Create Table Schemas
Design schemas for your fact and dimension tables
Write a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py
Complete the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables
Write SQL DROP statements to drop tables in the beginning of create_tables.py if the tables already exist. This way, you can run create_tables.py whenever you want to reset your database and test your ETL pipeline.
Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.
Test by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in your redshift database. You can use Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.
##### Build ETL Pipeline
Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
Test by running etl.py after running create_tables.py and running the analytic queries on your Redshift database to compare your results with the expected results.
Delete your redshift cluster when finished.

Note
The SERIAL command in Postgres is not supported in Redshift. The equivalent in redshift is IDENTITY(0,1), which you can read more on in the Redshift Create Table Docs.


REMINDER: Do not include your AWS access keys in your code when sharing this project!

## Running the python scripts

1. To run the program, you will need to fill the following information, and save it as *dwh.cfg* in the project root folder.

```
[CLUSTER]
HOST=''
DB_NAME=''
DB_USER=''
DB_PASSWORD=''
DB_PORT=5439

[IAM_ROLE]
ARN=

[S3]
LOG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/log_data'
LOG_JSONPATH='s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json'
SONG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/song_data'

[AWS]
KEY=
SECRET=

[DWH]
DWH_CLUSTER_TYPE       = multi-node
DWH_NUM_NODES          = 4
DWH_NODE_TYPE          = dc2.large
DWH_CLUSTER_IDENTIFIER = 
DWH_DB                 = 
DWH_DB_USER            = 
DWH_DB_PASSWORD        = 
DWH_PORT               = 5439
DWH_IAM_ROLE_NAME      = 
```

2. Create a python environment with the dependencies listed on *requirements.txt*
3. Run the *cluster.py* script to create a redshift cluster on AWS.

    `$ python create_cluster.py`

4. Run the *create_tables* script to set up the database staging and analytical tables.

    `$ python create_tables.py`

5. Run the *etl* script to extract data from the files in S3, stage it in redshift, and store it in the dimensional tables.

    `$ python create_tables.py`


## Project structure


## Queries and Results

Number of rows in each table:

| Table            | rows  |
|---               | --:   |
| staging_events   | 8056  |
| staging_songs    | 14896 |
| artists          | 10025 |
| songplays        | 333   |
| songs            | 14896 |
| time             |  8023 |
| users            |  105  |



### Discussion
```
python sql_queries.py
```

In the python file sql_queries.py the DROP, CREATE and INSERT query statements are first written. Below an example can be seen where a user table is created using SQl query "CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS name_of_the_table". The various columns in the table with their respective data type are then listed such as user id which is an integer. It is also declared as a PRIMARY KEY. <br/>

user_table_create = (""" <br/>
    CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS users <br/>
    (user_id int PRIMARY KEY,  <br/>
    first_name text NOT NULL, <br/>
    last_name text NOT NULL, <br/>
    gender text, <br/>
    level text) <br/>
""") <br/>

Following the same procedure, other tables of the star schema(listed in section Database Schema) are also created. Then continuing with the example, data is inserted into the user table as follows: <br/>

user_table_insert = (""" <br/>
    INSERT INTO users  <br/>
    (user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level) <br/>
    VALUES (%s, %s, %s, %s, %s) <br/>
    ON CONFLICT (user_id) DO UPDATE SET <br/>
    level = EXCLUDED.level <br/>
""")<br/>

Here the %s in VALUES act as placeholders for the data, which is comprised of user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, and  level respectively.<br/>

Same procedure is used for all the other tables in the schema. Finally, a general create table and drop table list is created which contains all the queries for each table in the schema:<br/>

create_table_queries = [user_table_create, artist_table_create, song_table_create, time_table_create, songplay_table_create] <br/>
drop_table_queries = [user_table_drop, artist_table_drop, song_table_drop, time_table_drop, songplay_table_drop] <br/>

 ```
python create_tables.py
```
In this python file three functions are written: 

1. create_database()
2. drop_tables(cur, conn)
3. create_tables(cur, conn)

The function create_database creates a connection to the database and return connection and cursor object. <br/>
The functions drop_tables and create_tables drop and create the tables in the database by taking in conn and cur objects as input. <br/>

These functions are called in the main function below for execution of their respective tasks:<br/>

def main():<br/>
 """
    Description: This is the main functon which implements the following:<br/>
    <br/>
    - Drops (if exists) and Creates the sparkify database. <br/>
    - Establishes connection with the sparkify database and gets
    cursor to it.  <br/>
    - Drops all the tables.  <br/>
    - Creates all tables needed.<br/>
    - Finally, closes the connection. <br/>
    <br/>
    Arguments:<br/>
    <br/>
    None <br/>
    <br/>
    Returns: <br/>
    <br/>
    None
    <br/>  
    """ <br/>
    
    
    cur, conn = create_database()
    
    drop_tables(cur, conn)
    create_tables(cur, conn)
    conn.close()


if __name__ == "__main__": <br/>
    main()

 ```
python etl.py
```

## ETL pipeline

Note: Before running(rerunning) etl.py and/or etl.pynb, database and tables need to be created(updated) each time by running 
python create_tables.py <br/>

Some of the Key components in etl.pynb and etl.py are:

- A connection is made to the sparkify database.
- A get_files function is written which provides the path to each data file
- The song data is first processed by putting the data into pandas dataframe by using pandas read_json function:
    df = pd.read_json(filepath,lines=True)
- The selected columns from the data are extracted from the pandas dataframe discussed in the above line:
   artist_id, artist_latitude, artist_location, artist_longitude, artist_name, duration, num_songs, song_id, title, year = df.values[0]
- The data is then put into a list:
   song_data = [song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration]
- The record is then inserted into the song table:
   cur.execute(song_table_insert, song_data)
   conn.commit()
   
 Similar procedure is followed for the other tables in the schema. The details can be seen in the files etl.pynb and etl.py.
 
 Recall that the difference between files etl.pynb and etl.py is that etl.pynb reads and processes and loads a single file from song_data and log_data as compared to etl.py which processes and loads all the data into the database.
   

